Bruce Lipton has been dazzling the world
with his work in the biology of belief.
And telling the story of how our beliefs and
environment shape our physical reality,
including the development of our DNA.
Now he has extended the understanding of the rise and fall
of our belief systems to our cultures at large in
his newest book, Spontaneous Evolution.
Last time we spoke,
we were getting into the book,
The Biology of Belief and we were talking about
how cells act as parts of community, members of a community
guided by our own consciousness, our own belief systems.
But you've taken this work and you've
expanded it out into a much larger scale,
looking at the evolution of larger systems,
in which each of us is acting like a cell
within the microsystem of the human body and
you're calling it spontaneous evolution in your new book.
And we need to get into...
I'd like to find out from you what had you...
What stimulated the leap from the
body to the larger system of cultures,
and some of the reason for why we need this now.
Well, there are two interesting and scientific foundations
for extending the work from the biology of belief
about cells and then extending it to people.
Number one is that we now recognize that nature
is designed, the geometry, the structure of nature
is designed on the basis of what is called fractal geometry.
And fractal geometry is unique geometry,
not the one we learn in school.
The geometry we did learn in school,
called Euclidean geometry, you can't model nature with it.
All those triangles, cones, cubes, and spheres
are not what nature really looks like.
But when we were five years old,
when we were in kindergarten, we made a tree,
we made a Euclidean tree, we had a cylinder for the trunk,
a ball for the top, but obviously, that's not nature-like.
That geometry is not the nature geometry.
We now recognize this new geometry that
really came into our world in 1983,
with the work of Benoit Mandelbrot from IBM,
called fractal geometry.
And it's a different version of geometry,
and it's very exciting.
But here's the fundamental,
key characteristic of this geometry.
Built into the nature of
the mathematics is a reality
that images of the structure repeat themselves
in a very self similar fashion at any level
of the organization that you're talking about.
So, if you want to talk about cells, or people,
or civilizations, they're all built on the same geometry.
But the key word for most people to understand is
that this geometry links an ancient, mystical understanding.
There was a phrase people were familiar with:
as above, so below.
Well, in this new geometry,
that becomes mathematical and scientific, as a reality.
That's why I can study the nature of a cell
and understand the nature of a human because
a human is a fractal image of a cell.
We're made out of cells,
we're just a large version of a cell.
And so that a human body turns not to be a one thing,
as we see it in the mirror,
but what we really understand,
if you could see it with microscopic eyes,
so you can see what it looked like,
you'd recognize that a human body is a
community of upwards to 50 trillion cells.
Every cell is essentially a miniature unit
because virtually, every cell has every function
that I have in my body, it's already present.
Matter of fact, any function that I do with my body
is only because a cell can do that function
because I'm made out of cells.
And we're talking right down to
reacting to emotional and external stressors in life.
Absolutely, the same responses of cells to their world
are exactly, the same kind of behavior responses
that we have in our own world,
and the world in where we live.
So then it becomes understandable.
This is why, for example, why we work on cells in biology.
Because if we get an understanding
of the nature of the cells,
we can apply that information directly to the
nature of human biology so that we extend this work.
So, in looking at nature's fractal,
and recognizing that the cell is actually the fundamental...
Recognize that the cell is the
fundamental unit of the human body,
that the human body is actually
built in the image of that cell,
then we start to recognize...
Inside of you right now are 50 trillion citizens.
Each cell is its own sentient being.
When I was culturing these cells,
I'd take them out of the person's body,
put them in a culture dish,
and they had their own life, they didn't need us.
Then all of a sudden, you look back and you say,
here we are in the world today,
with maybe seven billion people,
and we're on the edge of our own survival,
we're pushing our own extermination,
extinction is looming.
And because we can't seem to get along with
seven billion people on the entire
globe of the surface of this Earth,
and then I say, you know what,
inside of your body right now are 50 trillion cells.
They're like miniature humans,
every cell has their own life,
every cell has a job, every cell gets healthcare,
every cell gets protection, they live in a world.
They get paid, actually, for their work.
So, all of a sudden I say, there's a civilization
inside of us that is far more adaptable,
and capable of living in a world than we are.
And look at it this way,
they've been here a million years.
And guess what, when you are happy,
and you are healthy, that means that 50 trillion
citizens in your body are simultaneously
healthy and happy along with you.
Now, imagine if a whole world could
be like a healthy human body.
So, when we take the scientific foundation of fractals,
and apply that to our world,
and we say, look, you want to understand
how to have an economy?
Cells get paid, and it's interesting,
they're not communist in the sense that the skin cell
and the nerve cell gets the same amount of money, man.
The nerve cell makes a lot more money,
but it's job is a much greater job.
A skin cell makes less.
Every cell is paid according to its job.
But basically says this, there's no success in the system
until every cell has gotten its pay,
and every cells has done its job,
and every contributes to the whole of the community.
And then you look inside that community and you figure,
my goodness, how'd they figure all that out?
And the answer is as above, so below.
So if we look at the nature of how it works inside,
then we are given evidence through nature,
and through fractal geometry,
of how to do the same thing out here in our world.
And then when you start to look at that,
that's what my work start to extend and go,
wait a minute, we as individual units,
are like cells in a larger
super organism called humanity.
And what this new work that I'm involved with,
spontaneous evolution, is concerned about,
is we're on the threshold of an evolutionary leap.
It's not the evolution of the human,
humans are already evolved.
We're not evolving and changing,
it's the organization of humans
that is evolving and changing.
And in the biosphere,
we talk about humans collectively as an organism,
as a super organism.
So it's civilization that's evolving.
And then, when you put all of these pictures back together,
and you say, wait, if it's all built on fractals,
and it's all built on repetitive patterns,
then the evolution of civilization
would be a fractal image of evolution
that has already been played out before.
So if we could go back in the biosphere to lower levels,
see how the steps of evolution were accomplished,
apply that information to our civilization,
then we can make the necessary jump
that we're being forced to make right now.
And this really goes back to belief systems?
Oh, absolutely.
The whole thing is based on
the belief system of cultures throughout the ages
and what motivated those cultures.
And their religions, and so forth, right?
Yeah, it's very interesting because,
I'll give you a scientific fact,
the way I see it right now,
and that is civilization as we know it is ending.
Yes.
And that doesn't mean that people are disappearing
and the world disappears and all this.
It just says the way we live in
our world and have been living,
is changing so that order for us to survive,
we must change the way we live on this planet.
And we're being forced into this because there's
just a very obvious thing from the level of science.
Science has recognize that on this planet, in our history,
there have been five times where
biological life essentially got wiped out,
and then started all over again.
These are called mass extinctions.
So there were five previous mass extinctions in our history,
and what's interesting, all of them have been
attributed to extra-terrestial forces such as
a comet, or an ansteroid hiting the planet,
destroying the environment, causing upheaval,
loss of life, and then, a resurgence of all new life forms.
Okay, so we've now established that five times,
this has already occurred.
Here's the freaky part, science now recognizes
we're deep into the sixth mass extinction.
Now, science doesn't say we're
flirting with mass extinction,
it's already recognized we are deep
into the throes of a mass extinction.
Species are disappearing at rates
that have never been seen before.
That our own survival, is now actually a question.
It's not like, well, do you think
we're going to be affected by it?
No, the question now is will we survive this,
from a scientific understanding.
Consider this simple fact,
it is now established by science with 40 years,
the fish that we're familiar with
will be fished out of the ocean.
Okay, that's almost unimaginable to believe that.
Nature is a chain structure, a web structure.
And you start knocking out the pieces, the web underneath,
then the entire web starts to crash.
So yes indeed, science has recognized
we're facing our own extinction.
So that means we have to change the nature of civilization.
But here's the fun part,
this isn't the first time that this has happened.
In Western civilization, we can go back and I can tell you
there have been five different civilizations that have come,
raised up their way of life, and the world lived that way,
then those civilizations have crashed,
and have been replaced by new
civilizations with different ways of life.
This is not like the first time his has happened.
So we could go back,
and if we understand the nature of
how a civilization rises, and then why does it fall,
then look at these patterns, which are fractal,
then we can say, where are we in this process?
Of course, the most exciting thing is
I don't have to tell you that,
we don't have to tell the audience
we're on the cusp of an evolutionary upheaval.
We're facing it everyday, people can feel it.
And it's very interesting because
it may not be a conscious thing that they feel,
because there's something more profoundly,
deeply biological that's affecting them first.
And it's something that, in biology
we call the biological imperative.
Yes.
And the biological imperative is an
understanding that science has,
but it hasn't been able to find
the mechanism to account for it.
But here's the understanding,
any organism whose life is threatened,
the organism will take
every action possible to survive.
So it says that somehow rather,
built into an organism is a drive to stay alive.
And when that
staying alive becomes threatened,
then the organism is engaged and activated
to take any action at that point,
to survive whatever the threat
is being imposed upon them.
So basically, most people don't really
see the mechanics of what's going on in the world.
But regardless of that, they're very familiar with this,
that it seems kind of shaky, it's kind of threatening,
they feel it in their gut.
That's the biological imperative that says
something's not right and I'm concerned about this.
So it says, yes, the entire population,
even if they're not conscious of it,
is being driven by a biological reality
that we're on the edge of something that is so
life-changing, and we don't know.
And that's the exciting part, but then...
It's exciting to some and to others
who have grabbed a little bit further of the next emotion,
I think would be called fear...
(laughs)
Well, biological imperative actually induces fear.
Yes it does.
Well, this is interesting.
This is going to be a larger part of this conversation
because here you have people going into fear
because they can sense of feel this imperative issue,
and as a result, this creates often in times,
the old paradigm of competition when in fact,
we're moving into a new type of evolutionary pattern,
which actually requires the opposite.
I want to get into where those two bump up
against each other and how it's accomplished.
But can you do me a favor,
because I heard you lecture a while back
and I love the way you did this little diagram
in terms of belief systems and it says
where we started, the cycles we move through,
and how we're ending right back where we started.
And then you were talking again about animism
and so forth, thing going through.
And then talking about scientific materialism, animism,
could you give just your brief little talk to us--
The thumbnail sketch.
The thumbnail sketch of how
that wheel of life has been...
Oh, absolutely.
It's very exciting because we can
go back to the earliest civilizations,
when humanity started to come out of their
animal phase and started to come into a social organization.
It was at that time, at the earliest time,
that the first fundamental questions of our existence arose.
People started to ask the question,
how did we get here and why are we here?
How can we make the best of it while we're here?
Fundamental questions of human life.
Well, we can go back and we'll have to then
recognize that the earliest civilizations...
So let's just work with the
civilization I refer to as animism.
Animism, which is reflected, for example,
in the Native American way of life,
or the Druids in Europe, or the Aborigines in Australia,
these were people who lived in
harmony with their environment.
And they recognized that their world consisted
of two realms, the physical,
tangible, material realm,
but they were also very familiar with the
non-physical realm, an energy, an invisible realm
of influences that were not physical and tangible.
So basically, they looked at their world as
a balance between the two.
So for example if you were Native American,
and you wanted to go on a hunt,
let's say you want to go hunt for a buffalo,
you know that's the physical thing you were looking for,
but you also recognized there's an invisible relevance
to that buffalo as well, an energy, a spirit to it.
So if you want to go hunt for the buffalo,
yes you wanted the physical animal,
but you really had to appeal to its energy and its spirit.
So, in an animistic realm, they saw both worlds
existing simultaneously and not separable.
Mhm.
An animal and its spirit were always connected.
And that you had to recognize both realms
to make sense out of the world.
And the people and
their spirit were connected.
Oh everything.
Everything.
Yeah, a raindrop, a rabbit, a human,
anything that was tangible and physical,
did have an energetic
complement to it, okay?
And they were always connected.
So, they were very spiritual people but
they were also very material.
They lived in the world.
Basically, the questions that they were
trying to answer were the same questions
that were being asked by humans all over the world.
Same questions, how did we get here
and why are we here, et cetera.
Well, it's interesting because the questions,
these fundamental questions are frequently
referred to as the perennial questions.
They've been asked forever, they're the same questions.
Now, here's a fun part in looking
at the research I got involved with.
We went through different phases of our civilization.
And I thought, what is that brings up a civilization,
and what is it that brings it back down
and brings up the next one?
And it turns out that it's very simple.
And it works like this:
a civilization
is based on the beliefs that...
or the answers to the perenial questions.
Whoever provides answers to those fundamental questions,
how did we get here, why are we here,
how do we make the best of it?
If a group buys the answer from
some entity or some organization,
we have a couple of things going on.
Number one, we then make that source our
truth provider for that civilization.
Whoever we buy the answers from,
we have question about anything else,
we go to them, because they are our truth providers.
Number two, whatever answers they provide,
then we use those as a guide
to shape how we live
with each other and with our relationship to the planet.
And now here's the interesting, fun part,
that what we have seen over the years is that
the answers to the questions change periodically.
And when the answers to the questions change,
new answers come in,
provided by new truth providers,
with new ways of living life.
The old ways then start to crash,
and a new civilization comes up.
It doesn't mean you get rid of everything
from the previous civilization.
You take the stuff that was good,
bring it with you, and then add the new information.
So we're always taking along the things that work
and adding the new things.
And the things that don't work at the end of civilization,
we let those go and replace them with the new beliefs.
Okay, so...
So, then how do get
from animism to what followed?
Well, let's answer the question as animist did,
why did they live this way?
And the answer to the question is
how did we get here?
And to animists, the answer is essentially
father sky and mother earth.
You might say, oh that sounds really nice and mythological,
and fairytale-like, and it turns out,
no, it's absolutely the most scientifically
accurate assessment of how we got here.
We got here because we are made out of
elements of the earth, the atoms, the physical material.
But that's just inorganic chemistry,
like earth, and crystals and rocks, and stuff like that.
But when you take the earth, the elements of earth,
and combine it with sunlight,
then you take an element of the earth
and mix it with the energy unit,
so now you have energized earth,
and this is called organic chemistry,
and it provides the foundation of all living organisms.
So living organisms are made out of
the elements of the earth that have
fused with the energy of the sun.
So they're energized matter,
we're enlivened matter,
that we are infused with the light from the sun.
This is where our energy comes from.
So as living things, we express
mother earth and father sky, okay?
So that makes total scientific sense.
And then, the next question is then
why are we here?
Well, they had a great answer, those animists.
They said we're here to tend the garden.
And they knew at that point,
that every organism is part of a community,
that the entire biosphere,
including the humans in that biosphere,
are one entangled, integrated whole.
And if they learned to live in harmony with each other,
it will prosper and the garden will grow.
So yeah, we're here to tend the garden, great idea.
And how do you do that?
And the answer is learn to live in harmony
with each other and with nature.
So, these sound like wonderful ways of life,
and in fact, many people in this world aspire
to that exact way of life.
Yes.
But what happened over time was,
we bought into some new beliefs.
And the new beliefs to the next level of evolution changed,
that instead of every physical object having
a spirit entangled with it,
the next level of our culture bought into a belief
that said well, the spirit is separate from the matter.
And that there are gods.
So there's a god of water.
Animists said that every drop of water has a spirit,
but the next level is called polytheism, many gods.
And what that did was take the spirit out of the matter
and make it a separate entity.
So I can talk about, oh, here's matter over here,
and here's spirit over here,
now we can talk about them as separate elements.
Animists, you could never separate them.
Okay, so now what does that mean?
Well, the first thing it means is this,
as humans, we lost our spirit.
There was a spirit of humanity,
but it wasn't in you and me anymore.
We're just like the rocks and the dirt now,
in regard to that.
Then there was an emphasis to say,
well, which realm is more important?
Well, the invisible realm got the knots on that one.
And people started to say,
yes, let's worship the gods.
And the material realm got less value to it
because it was that mystery that
came from the invisible realm.
And basically, it changed the way we lived on this planet,
when the truths started to come from
the priests of the polytheistic temples,
we lost our power, our spirit.
We're in a world disconnected from spirit,
but we want to learn to live in harmony with spirit.
So for example, in the Greeks,
their answers to the question,
how did we get here,
and the answers the Greek came up with,
we came from chaos, and you go,
well, that's kind of weird.
And then I say, now, wait a minute,
as scientists and physicists will tell you,
that the physical universe came out of a chaos
of energy one day in a big bang and exploded into reality.
So, the Greeks had an insight to this already as well.
So they weren't wrong,
it was just a new vision on the take.
But then you say, well,
if you came from chaos then what's
our purpose for being here?
Well, they had trouble with the answer to that.
It's like, well, it was chaos.
I don't know why we're here,
we just came out of this chaos.
But they did have an answer for the third question,
the perennial question of how do you make the best of it.
And their answer was, and I like it because it's fun,
don't anger the gods.
What does that mean?
Well, here's the point.
In polytheism, the gods can take on
any different form and shape,
that the person sitting next to you at a table
could be god, you don't know,
because the gods are always changing.
Well, that means if you don't know who god is,
well then, you better be darn nice to everybody
because you don't know.
So, it really generated a communal understanding,
okay, I like everybody because
one of you might be god in here.
Don't want the judgement.
So, we bought that and it was a
period where civilization removed an
emphasis from the material plane,
and started putting a little bit more emphasis
into appeasing and appealing the invisible
forces that apparently were shaping the planet.
And what's very interesting,
every civilization, be it the animists or the polytheist,
or the other ones we're going to talk about,
civilizations are like living organisms.
They arise, they're born, they develop,
they go into a mature, adult stage,
and then at some point, they go into a decline.
And as they go into a decline,
a new civilization will start to come up.
And you say, well, why did they go into a decline?
And here's a fun answer to the question.
Civilizations, like children, start out in a
developmental phase like children.
We try everything.
Let's just try things for the fun of it.
And then at some point, of course,
with the parental pressures and everything,
we get pushed into a way of,
this is the way life is.
And so as we leave childhood and get into maturity,
we get, what we would say,
rigid beliefs about this is the way life is.
This is the law, it's rigid.
While children are out there pushing the limits,
parents are holding the limits saying,
this is just the way it is.
Well, there's a little problem with rigidity,
and that is nothing in the universe is rigid
and stays the same, nothing.
So the concept that you can have a civilization
say we're going to stay exactly
the same way as we are, is like--
Creates a lot of resistance, that's for sure.
And a lot of force to keep the universe from doing that.
So what does it lead to?
It says as civilization mature, then become rigid,
they run and operate for a while,
but then their rigidity creates challenges,
because you're not allowing the bending
and the movement, the evolution.
And the challenges start to build up.
And when the challenges get to a certain level,
it signals the decline of the old, rigid way of thinking,
and the birth of a bunch of new people,
creative minorities, saying, what other way
can we survive and live in this world?
And generate all new ideas,
and they become the birthing of a new civilization
as the old one declines.
So, what we talk about right now is
we started with animism, spirit and matter,
one and the same, can't separate them.
Go into polytheism, separate spirit,
and get many different gods to it,
and the spirits live on the planet.
So Mount Olympus, it was really some place on the planet,
somewhere, the gods were here.
When polytheism started to fail,
a new civilization started to take over.
And the new civilization is called monotheism,
and monotheism brings all the ideas of spirit from the past,
and different gods, and tried to bring them together
to make a new vision.
So, what's the new vision?
Yes, spirit is separate from the material world,
but now guess what?
Now the spirit's not even on this planet anymore.
Spirit's somewhere else, and it's overriding everything.
And it's only one spirit,
and it doesn't even exist here anymore.
And then what the belief of the civilization was,
well, how did monotheism answer the questions
that then shape the civilization?
And the answer is, well,
we got here through divine intervention,
so God infused us with life.
That's David and Michelangelo picture,
touching
God and finger, stuff like that.
We got infused with life.
You say yeah, but...
why are we here?
And the answer is, well, you know what,
as it turns out, we really don't want to be here.
We really want to be over to that invisible place
where all that spiritual stuff is happening,
but we're not ready to go.
So this is a playground where
we play out plays of morality.
And what was the point?
This was a testing point.
If you do okay on this physical plane,
then you will be allowed to go to the other place.
So the thing is, here's the world that's
based on material and spiritual, and guess what?
We discard the material because
that's the thing that's damned.
If you get trapped in the material realm,
that's keeping you from going to that spiritual realm.
So we separated matter and spirit so much
that spirit doesn't exist here.
And our mission here is only to go there.
So how do you do that?
How do you make the best of it?
And the answer is we live by the
laws of the scripture and the Bible, okay?
So we buy into this, and the world goes pretty good,
under monotheism, except for there's a problem.
And that is, the church, in running this civilization,
claims the concept of absolute knowledge.
Meaning, that their truths are the truths.
And no other truths can question that.
And if you do question that truth, well...
I love it, it's primal example of
what's called the kangaroo court.
In other words, you challenge the church,
and they pull you into the inquisition court,
I don't care who your lawyer is,
You lose.
You're not making it through that court.
And the reason is this,
because, if anything was found to be untrue,
and was proven to be untrue, any simple little fact,
then the concept of absolute knowledge falls out.
So the church protects absolute knowledge by what?
Preventing any new knowledge from coming in.
Right.
And that was called the inquisition, okay?
So, the church is running this but
here's where the problem comes down.
It's just inevitable.
Knowledge is power, absolute knowledge
is absolute power,
And absolute power absolutely corrupts.
The church lost its mission.
While they were claiming,
let's all go up to the spiritual heaven
and let go of the material plane,
they were the one that were
collecting the most of the material plane.
They were taking the money and all the
proceeds of this material plane
and trading and bartering
that for your ticket to go to the other place.
Absolutely corruption.
Absolute corruption.
That led people to be a little more skeptical at some point,
and ultimately led to the Protestant Reformation that said
maybe this isn't completely the whole story.
And the Protestants brought back materialism.
Because the church said that matter is damned.
Your connection to matter is keeping you from going there.
And the Protestants brought back materialism and said this:
if God loves you, he will then reward you with matter.
So your success in the material realm
could be considered your success in the spiritual realm
because God is giving you this.
So, we go from monotheism,
which said that matter is damned and
you only want to go to the spiritual world.
Then Protestant, changes that a bit and says
material's not so bad, you can have some of that stuff.
It didn't change civilization because the answers
were, pretty still, the same one,
divine intervention, living out plays moralidly,
living, quoting the scriptures, same.
Civilization didn't change,
but people started questioning the truths.
And the truths were
questioned until 1859.
Because that's when Charles Darwin came in,
with the theory of evolution.
And what was relevant about this?
Well, the world was facing challenges,
the corruption of the church had precipitated.
So that meant civilization was in a state of
turmoil and upheaval, looking for some new answers.
And science came on to the realm
and provided some new answers.
And the first thing that came in
was the concept of genesis.
That vision of God instilling life into us because
Darwin came up with something that the
average person on the street
could so easily comprehend,
and it didn't seem magic at that point.
He came up with the theory of evolution.
He said two parents mate,
they make a bunch of offsprings,
and ever now and then,
one of the offspring's kind of weird,
and moves off in a different direction.
And if you would make those offsprings,
then it would go off further in a different direction.
So, the relevance of the people in the 1850's was
pre-television, pre-Gameboy, most people's entertainment
was breeding plants and animals.
So, everyone is familiar.
You take two parents, you breed them,
you get a litter of something,
and you're also familiar with,
every now and then, the weirdo happens.
And so, when Darwin took that image that
everybody was familiar with and said,
so push that weirdo idea a number of generation,
and all of a sudden, a new species come.
Well, everybody said, that had to make more sense
than God created earth in seven days.
And this was the breaking of the back
of the previous civilization monotheism because
new answers started coming in.
And the new answers to the questions
were based on science's view.
And people had more trust in science as
a truth provider than they did the church.
So, in the previous civilization, monotheism,
yes, they answered the perennial questions,
but if you had any question about life,
where would you go?
Who was your truth provider?
You go to the priest.
But after science came in with new answers,
and the people as a group started to say,
I accept those, more than the previous generation.
And so what were the answers that science came up with?
Well, how did we get here?
Random mutation, yeah, well I can see that.
I mated plants and animals, that makes a lot of sense.
Why are we here?
Well, there's absolutely no reason.
Why, we're here because it was an accident of genetics.
It was like shaking genetic dice,
it just turned out that way.
Basically, then science put a little caveat,
we don't know why we're here,
but while we're here, our mission is to reproduce,
because that would the Darwinian drive
for taking over reproduction.
And then, how do you make the best of it?
This is the killer.
Because science came up with a story,
based on Thomas Malthus that,
animals breed faster than plant life,
so that a farmer growing animals,
the population would double every year.
But a farmer growing corn,
is not going to double the yield of corn every year.
And why is that relevant?
Well, all of a sudden you say, wait,
animals are growing faster than feed,
what does that mean?
That means at some point
there's going to be more animals than feed.
And this Malthusian idea was really the idea
that we're going to run into a struggle for our survival.
Why, because there's going to be more organisms than food.
And so, what does that mean?
Well, it says then if you understand
the nature of civilization, it says then,
inevitably, we're going to breed too many people,
we're going to use up all the food.
There's going to be a fight,
and the survivor will be the fittest.
So then I say, how do you make the best of it?
And the answer is on this planet, well, to be the fittest
and you say, in this struggle for survival.
The first premise of the belief system is
we live in a world that's based on a struggle.
This is a dog eat dog world,
and how are you going to win?
Well, you're going to be the fittest.
Well, how are you going to do that?
Competition, and you're going to compete.
And you're going to beat the other guy.
And if they die, that's okay too because
there's too many of them anyway.
So this whole belief of this dog eat dog world
became a true,
and a cultural template
of which we live by in this world.
It's very interesting.
Charles Darwin's book was titled
On the Origin of Species.
And he had a subtitle,
so it was On the Origin of Species or,
The Preservation of the Favored Races
in the Struggle for Survival.
What sold the book was not on the origin of species.
What sold the book was the subtitle,
and that was why it was intentionally made.
On the Preservation of the Favored Races
in the Struggle for Survival.
This book became a premier for governance
because every government wanted to
take care of its favored race, its own people.
Well, how do you do it?
Well, here's the instruction book of evolution.
Says you got to be the fittest, yeah, how?
Because you have to compete and beat the other people.
So all of sudden it's like, my god,
the previous civilization, monotheism,
how do you make the best of it?
Well, you live by the law of the scripture.
And we say, well now, what about this new civilization,
which is based on scientific understanding,
which is actually called scientific materialism
because it's based on the matter world as
being primal over the invisible world,
an extension of Newtonian physics.
Well, how do you make the best of it?
And the answer is, live by the law of the jungle.
You win.
You win no matter what it takes to win.
So in other words, you could be the fittest
by having a superior brain,
or you can be the fittest by using
an Uzi and wiping out everybody else.
It doesn't matter, science has no morality.
It just says whoever is standing at the end is the winner.
So for the last
150 years,
we've been living in a culture with the premise that
hey, we're disconnected from everything,
we got here by random accident.
We're just here living on the planet,
use whatever you want.
The more matter you have in a material world,
the more successful you are.
And to keep that matter, anything applies.
You can kill people, you can do anything you want,
because you're the top dog, and that's all that matters.
Then you look at the world today and you say,
isn't that interesting?
Our belief systems have manifested this world.
So we talk about our world being violent,
how come it's so violent?
And the answer is, it's because we believe it's violent.
And then we activate on that belief and manifest violence
but accept it as, oh that's scientifically valid,
so we can go kill people, that's okay with us.
Now guess what, we've passed through
each of these civilizations.
And just as the church started to fall because
it got corrupt and it didn't meet the system
and created a lot of challenges...
The challenges we face today,
from the extension of scietific materialism,
a science based on the material world as primal,
and the invisible world as negligible
and aren't influencing us at all,
then we live in a world he with the most toys wins.
Let me get the most money that I can get.
Let me get the most land and things.
So we're out there being the biggest
and the best dogs in the world.
And the reality is, this is so completely out of alignment
with the new version of science.
Because science has new answers that
completely conflict with the existing
the perennial questions and answers.
And why is that relevant?
Since the answers to the questions shape civilization,
then the new answers are going to shape it
in a different way then the current answers.
So I say, well, what's the new answers?
The civilization we're moving into is one that...
Number one, how did we get here?
Not random mutations.
Here's how it works.
Nature introduces every new
organism into the environment
as a mechanism of bringing balance and harmony.
But at some point, when we bring in a new organism,
it itself will disrupt the harmony.
So the new organism brought harmony,
then set it out of balance again.
Then nature brings in another organism,
and this has been going on for
a millenia, millions of years.
And where are we?
We're at this point that nature
created an organism, humans,
that could stand at the fulcrum of a seesaw.
Where every other organism was at one end of the seesaw
and it caused the seesaw to move this way,
and then a new organism tried to bring it back,
but it went back up, and the new organism...
And every time you bring it up,
the newer organism gets closer to the fulcrum,
and where are we?
Humans have one foot on each side of the fulcrum.
And what's the relevance to that?
Because as a single species,
we tilt one way, we tilt the other way,
and the whole of the environment shifts.
And our job was,
as the Native Americans knew,
to bring harmony and live in harmony
with nature and tend this garden.
So guess what?
The new vision says we didn't get here by accident,
we got here through a process of adaptation.
Adaptation what, to keep in balance, okay?
Our first reason for being here is
we were meant to bring balance to
this civilization and evolution, okay?
Why are we here?
Tend the garden.
Then you look around and you say,
well, in scoring ourselves in garden tending,
we have really failed, haven't we?
Yeah, we haven't done well.
No, we've destroyed the entire foundation.
That's why the ecosystem as a web and network,
when you punch holes into that, the web will collapse.
Yeah, but we're at the top of the web.
And you say, so what?
As we write in the book,
so what if there are no tigers out in the world anymore?
We can always see them at the zoo.
And the reality is, no.
Tigers had a role in the environment.
And when you take them out of the environment,
their role's not being accommodated.
That means then, the environment is now out of balance.
We have to learn to live in balance.
So we're severely out of balance.
Yes.
And by bringing that to full circle,
we can see where we're headed out of pure necessity,
and the people they call the forward thinkers,
cultural creatives, whatever you want to call it,
are already on board with the vision of
going back to restoring balance again.
However, now we're facing
the letting go of
the perhaps, even the destruction of many of
the old systems and ways right now,
which creates that fear which stimulates our
current sense of survival of the fittest, and so forth.
So how do we begin?
Now let's talk about how we begin--
Well, first of all, first recognize this.
The institutions that we build in our world,
the political institution, the economic institution,
the educational institution, the healthcare institution,
those institutions are based on scientific materialism.
The belief that genes control who we are,
that we're biochemical machines,
and with enough regulation of the
chemistry and the machinery,
then humans can control nature.
That is the mission statement of modern science.
It's been that way for 350 years.
It is to understand nature so that
we can manipulate and control it.
That's the vision, right?
Oh, we don't care what nature does,
we'll just make what we want.
And it's sort of like,
you're living independent of nature to do that.
And the consequences of that are now playing out.
The fish are dying, the air is polluted,
the ground's got pharmaceuticals,
so destructive of life, built into that everywhere.
We've destroyed all these things.
And you say, well, why aren't we making a revolution then?
And here comes what you brought up and it says this:
well, the institutions that are here were built
on the mission statement of the old belief system.
And here's, oh god, the unfortunate part.
Any system, be it the church, be it education,
be it healthcare, I don't care which one it is.
An institution starts out with
the mission of helping people.
That's what it's function was.
But as the mission grows and
the institution grows bigger,
there's a transition that has occurred in our world,
where the institution takes on a life of its own,
and has its own biological imperative.
To serve itself.
So, is the healthcare to serve people?
No, the healthcare is to make money
for people who invested in healthcare.
Is education here to serve the student?
And the answer, as an academician, well, absolutely not.
It's there to sustain itself.
They have a budget, they want to be in the black.
So, how do you do that?
You sell products, you sell yourself out,
and the mission of what?
Taking care of the people, that's secondary.
It's now the mission of being alive
and taking care of yourself.
The church starts out, Mother Teresa...
She was the epitome of what it was about.
Go out on the street and work with the people
and uplift their lives.
And you go, is that the mission of the church?
And the answer's no, the church is now so big
its mission is to maintain itself.
It's got a bank, it's got money everywhere.
Its mission is to take care of itself.
The people, oh, that was secondary.
We live in a world where the institutions
have taken on their own life.
And they were built on a premise
that is no longer real or true.
And they don't want to die because they're self sustaining.
So they won't let go even though they're killing us.
So, the reality is yeah, but,
hey, it's evolution.
And extinction applies to, not just to the people,
but to the institutions that the
people have used to represent them.
And then you say, well,
you mean this thing is falling apart?
And I'm going, well yes,
because of a simple reason.
And Einstein said it, I just love it, a simple quote:
"You can't solve the problems with
the same thinking that created them."
The institutions that we now support,
government, economics, education, healthcare, religion,
have created the problems.
And if we sustain them,
they're just sustaining the problems.
The only realistic way out is new institutions.
Yeah, but how does that happened?
The old institutions fall.
So now you say, oh my god,
that means we have to go through this craziness.
There's two ways to go through craziness.
Let's give an earlier example because
since nature is fractal, I can give you a story
of a similar story of what we're
playing through right now,
that you can understand more simply.
I said, cells are the equivalent of miniature people,
so I say, look inside a caterpillar that's growing.
You got a billion cells in there, and guess what,
they're like people like us, they're working everyday,
cells in the digestive system are
taking the food and breaking it down,
and making products out of it.
Cells of the immune system are
taking their job of protecting the system.
Respiration systems, making sure
fresh oxygen is being delivered.
So, all these cells have jobs,
and the caterpillar's growing.
If you were in there, a reporter,
you'd look around and go yeah,
the economy's going great guns, it's growing every day,
everybody's working, full employment.
This is the kind of thing we love to see.
How much are we growing every day?
Some percent, every day, and so the economy's going great.
You live in that community, it's booming.
There's a point where the caterpillar reaches a size limit.
And it stops eating as much, it stops growing as much.
And that mean less product is coming in,
less work is required.
The cells start to recognize,
well, this thing's slowing down.
They're laying cells off,
the digestive system just laid off
a massive number of workers, why?
There's no food coming in.
And you say, well, what are these cells going to do?
Well, they're all milling around now going,
wait, this thing's falling apart.
And the cells are going to get scared.
Of course, because they live based
on the civilization of their community.
And when the caterpillar stops growing,
the community starts falling apart.
And so, if you were one of the stomach cells,
or one of the respiratory cells,
you'd go, my job security is falling apart.
Oh my god, we're not going to have enough food,
what are we going to do?
And fear...
But in the midst of this falling apart,
cells are commiting suicide,
which is called apoptosis in the biological world.
And the thing, this structure is falling apart,
and a lot of people are pulling out their cilia,
going oh my god, it's the end of the world.
In among them are other cells that,
genetically identical to them, no different.
But they think differently,
they respond to the signals differently.
And they have this wonderful name called imaginal cells.
And what are the imaginal cells?
They're cells that are saying we can
create something far better than this.
And what they do is start to organize the other cells,
saying look, let's restructure this thing,
because we can make something
far better than this caterpillar.
The imaginal cells start organizing the
community to create the butterfly.
So from the destruction of the caterpillar emerges
the much more advanced evolution of a butterfly.
What this is relevant is this,
we're living in a caterpillar world,
that is trying to emerge into a butterfly.
Well, how are you going to do that?
And the answer is the old structures
feeding the caterpillar are not
supporting the evidence of a butterfly.
And therefore, you have two choices in this world right now.
You can retain your caterpillar status,
and go, oh my god, the sky is falling,
and be in fear, and get sick because that
is what the biology of belief reveals.
Once you're in fear, it generates illness in the system.
Or you can say,
rather than focusing on the
demise of the butterfly, I'd rather contribute to the
evolution and development of the new structure.
The caterpillar is going, I want to build a butterfly.
Why?
Because if I become active and positive
in the process of building the butterfly,
I'm engaged, I'm working, we're creating the future.
If I sit there and bemoan the loss of the caterpillar,
then I'm making myself sick,
and everything around me, why?
I'm not contributing to our evolution.
And so, where are we?
We're at the demise of the
caterpillar stage of civilization,
and the rise of the butterfly.
The creative minorities are out there,
creating all new technologies that are
not going to threaten our existence.
New forms of energy, new forms of creating health,
the whole healthcare system, is detritus,
is the way I look at it, it's dead,
and killing people on the way down.
I hate to say it, but it's a simple fact.
True.
When you look at the data, iatrogenic illness,
meaning medicine-related illness, meaning,
I go to the doctor with a problem A,
get treated, and die from medical-related illness B.
Iatrogenic illness is the leading cause
of death in our civilization.
Yes we need healthcare reform,
we need a whole new vision,
without the institutions that
have been promoting the old way.
So when they fall apart, I sit here going,
okay, cool, why?
Because now, it's another stumbling block out of the way
that is preventing us from making our evolution.
But I have to sit here and tell you the truth,
will we be successful in this evolution?
And the answer is hey...
The answer to that question is not in yet.
We may or may not make it.
We're at a pivotal moment of our evolution, right now.
But this is why I'm excited about the new book.
Yes.
Because the new book says up to our history now,
we've just been passive elements in our civilization.
Things happen to us, just comes out of the sky.
Forces unbeknownst to me are controlling my life.
The new biology turns all this around and reveals,
my god, we've been powerful people forever,
except we have been programmed to become powerless.
We have lost our power during our childhood
developmental experiences from in utero,
to the first six years of our lives.
What's this all about?
Well, in the biology of belief,
we talk about the fact that a child is programmed,
the mind of a child is programmed,
and the mind controls the genes and the behavior,
and the mind of a child is programmed by the experiences
that in utero to the first six years.
And then I go back and I say,
although I wrote this very recently,
this is not a new idea, these are thousand years.
Thousand years ago, the Jesuits was...
Today, they still say the same thing:
you give me the child,
and I will show you the man.
Or another way of saying that,
you give me the child until it's six or seven,
and it will belong to the church for the rest of its life.
What are they talking about?
The biology of belief.
And what they knew about the biology of belief
was that the biology
of belief is that
our perceptions and beliefs about life
control our genetics and our behavior.
And they knew by giving a child and teaching it
what perceptions it should have,
and what beliefs it should have,
they control the fate of that child.
Do you think this idea just disappeared?
The Jesuits knew that, and that was nice,
but we don't care about that.
This belief has been known about for that long.
And I'm just going to give a brief summary about
it right here and go like this,
if we're creating our lives and creating the world
as the biology of beliefs says,
and I say let's go out and do a survey of the entire
seven billion people on this population on the world,
and I say, let's do a survey, what do you want?
And the answers will inevitably come back,
I want peace, freedom, a job,
a place to live, some food, that's all I want.
If 90% or more of the population would
answer this question that way,
which I believe it would, makes you think,
how come the world we live in is
so filled with crime and violence and guns and
people ripping off everybody,
and this is the way of life.
How did that manifest in the world
where if we're creating the world,
and 90% of us want this world.
And the answer is this,
because that knowledge of programming
was always maintained by the people in charge.
Be it the church when they were doing it,
or whoever they passed it to next.
The concept of if I can program your child,
I can control that child.
So it says yeah, 90 plus percent
of us want peace in this world,
and we live in a world without peace,
what does that mean?
A small percentage of people have manipulated
the beliefs, programmed the individuals,
given up our own power,
and bought their belief system,
and now manifest and live in their world.
And what's the evolution about?
The evolution that's happening right now?
Is the understanding that we are powerful people,
and that by rewriting our belief system,
and understanding who we really are,
we can empower ourselves.
And when the population en masse understand this,
then the beliefs and desires of
that population will manifest itself.
And how will that happen?
When the small percent that runs the institutions,
that shape us, lose their power
as we gain our power,
that is the evolution.
So, the most wonderful part is,
the evolution that is so promising and
so hopeful is based on us.
And we have to recover and regain
who we really are.
Because when we do that,
then we manifest the future.
And I see how beautiful it is, why?
Because I've traveled through that body,
with 50 trillion citizens, and saw,
oh my god, look how they spend money in here.
Look how they save money in here,
they do it differently.
And look how it works, and it says,
the answers for us
are already worked out.
Cells have politics, economics, healthcare,
defense postures, everything that we need.
And they've done it.
And all we have to do is say,
can we follow what you did?
And the answer is that's what fractals evolution.
Bruce is lecturing around the world on
spontaneous evolution at present,
so you may be able to hear him live
if you check into his schedule on his site, BruceLipton.com.
Meanwhile, you can pick up a copy of
Spontaneous Evolution at any major book seller.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.